

#### 18.4 Filter Properties                                {#h-18-04}


We discuss briefly the rationale behind the choice of filters.  Our
approach is necessarily cursory; a genuinely accurate discussion
would require a couple of books.  Readers unfamiliar with signal
processing may or may not wish to skip this.

All digital signals are of course sampled in some fashion.  The case
where the inter-sample spacing (say in time for audio samples, or
space for pixels) is uniform, that is, the same at all positions, is
particularly common and amenable to analysis.  Many aspects of the
treatment of such signals are best-understood in the frequency domain
via Fourier Analysis, particularly those aspects of the signal that
are not changed by shifts in position, especially when those
positional shifts are not given by a whole number of samples.

Non-integral translates of a sampled signal are a textbook example of
the foregoing.  In our case of non-integral motion vectors, we wish
to say what the underlying image "really is" at these pixels;
although we don't have values for them, we feel that it makes sense
to talk about them.  The correctness of this feeling is predicated on
the underlying signal being band-limited, that is, not containing any
energy in spatial frequencies that cannot be faithfully rendered at
the pixel resolution at our disposal.  In one dimension, this range
of "OK" frequencies is called the Nyquist band; in our two-
dimensional case of integer-grid samples, this range might be termed
a Nyquist rectangle.  The finer the grid, the more we know about the
image, and the wider the Nyquist rectangle.

It turns out that, for such band-limited signals, there is indeed an
exact mathematical formula to produce the correct sample value at an
arbitrary point.  Unfortunately, this calculation requires the
consideration of every single sample in the image, as well as needing
to operate at infinite precision.  Also, strictly speaking, all band-
limited signals have infinite spatial (or temporal) extent, so
everything we are discussing is really some sort of approximation.

It is true that the theoretically correct subsampling procedure, as
well as any approximation thereof, is always given by a translation-
invariant weighted sum (or filter) similar to that used by VP8.  It
is also true that the reconstruction error made by such a filter can
be simply represented as a multiplier in the frequency domain; that
is, such filters simply multiply the Fourier transform of any signal
to which they are applied by a fixed function associated to the
filter.  This fixed function is usually called the frequency response
(or transfer function); the ideal subsampling filter has a frequency
response equal to one in the Nyquist rectangle and zero everywhere
else.

Another basic fact about approximations to "truly correct"
subsampling is that the wider the subrectangle (within the Nyquist
rectangle) of spatial frequencies one wishes to "pass" (that is,
correctly render) or, put more accurately, the closer one wishes to
approximate the ideal transfer function, the more samples of the
original signal must be considered by the subsampling, and the wider
the calculation precision necessitated.

The filters chosen by VP8 were chosen, within the constraints of 4 or
6 taps and 7-bit precision, to do the best possible job of handling
the low spatial frequencies near the 0th DC frequency along with
introducing no resonances (places where the absolute value of the
frequency response exceeds one).

The justification for the foregoing has two parts.  First, resonances
can produce extremely objectionable visible artifacts when, as often
happens in actual compressed video streams, filters are applied
repeatedly.  Second, the vast majority of energy in real-world images
lies near DC and not at the high end.

To get slightly more specific, the filters chosen by VP8 are the best
resonance-free 4- or 6-tap filters possible, where "best" describes
the frequency response near the origin: The response at 0 is required
to be 1, and the graph of the response at 0 is as flat as possible.

To provide an intuitively more obvious point of reference, the "best"
2-tap filter is given by simple linear interpolation between the
surrounding actual pixels.

Finally, it should be noted that, because of the way motion vectors
are calculated, the (shorter) 4-tap filters (used for odd fractional
displacements) are applied in the chroma plane only.  Human color
perception is notoriously poor, especially where higher spatial
frequencies are involved.  The shorter filters are easier to
understand mathematically, and the difference between them and a
theoretically slightly better 6-tap filter is negligible where chroma
is concerned.

